Fix Sando hospital parking

As illustrated by our reporting on this story in yesterday’s edition, an 
untenable situation in need of urgent redress now exists at the San Fernando 
General Hospital.
This involves the chronic case of an absence of available parking space for 
members of the public, with spaces ostensibly reserved for staff only.
Expressing their frustrations about what to them is intolerable, citizens 
visiting the facility wonder whether they must find parking elsewhere, or travel 
to the hospital. Every car park near the hospital seems to be for staff, they 
claim. Not practically speaking, it ought to be self-evident that not everyone 
is able to walk to get to the hospital.
On a regular basis there is chaos and frayed emotions, further compounded by 
apparently discourteous security personnel.
Our own reporters who visited the facility witnessed chaos. The space provided 
for the public is too small, so people are parking their cars haphazardly.
What was on display was the flaring of tempers between persons wishing to visit 
the hospital for one reason or another, principally to visit sick relatives and 
friends who are hospitalised there, and attendants on duty. One woman reported a 
situation in which she was stuck in one position for more than half an hour 
seeking to get out of the parking lot.
In a revealing comment, the city’s Mayor, Alderman Junia Regrello, said he was 
not conversant on the matter, one which has clearly been in existence for some 
time. He based his lack of knowledge on the fact that he has not had cause to 
visit the hospital, for one reason or other, at least for a number of years.
The Mayor did counter, however, by pointing to the existence of alternative 
parking arrangements in locations presumably within walking distance to the 
hospital.
But, again, for any number of reasons, this may be an inconvenient and 
improbable proposition for someone dropping off a sick person, or collecting 
someone just being released from the facility.
And another official professing ignorance to the difficulties related by persons 
forced to seek parking is the Chief Executive Officer of the South West Regional 
Health Authority. He professed his ignorance, despite our reporting which 
highlighted the fact that these inconveniences have been widely circulated on 
social media. One of the despatches involved a man posting a video showing a 
parking lot at the hospital with ample space available, while he alleged having 
been told by an attendant that it was full.
In both cases, the Mayor and the SWRHA CEO appear to be ill-served by whatever 
mechanisms they may have in place to monitor public sentiment on issues 
impacting on their ability to render service to their publics. The situation 
calls for a thorough review of the arrangements under which the parking 
facilities at the hospital are being used.
There ought to be a balance between parking for staff, and parking for members 
of the public having to visit there for any number of reasons.
An argument appears ready to be considered for the construction of a multi-level 
car park on the compound.