Whither freedom of information

RECENT court rulings have confirmed deficiencies in the operation of the Freedom 
of Information (FOI) Act. These rulings shine a light on the need for public 
authorities to engage in a radical culture-change, one in step with the demands 
of 21st century civic life.
We have always been a society that prefers secrecy to the sharing of 
information, especially from the top down. The aim of the FOI was to hand the 
ordinary citizen an advantage when it comes to the affairs of powerful state 
entities. Anyone could apply for information using the designated forms in a 
process that seemed straightforward. And yet, that’s not how things have gone in 
practice.
Lengthy delays often effectively frustrate applications, particularly in the 
context of requests from members of the media. Information would often be 
disclosed, but so late as to no longer be relevant or in a manner that it’s 
overtaken by other forms of disclosure. To some extent, stretching the timeline 
out to its limits came to be regarded as a filibustering tactic, undermining 
the aim of the act which is to create a general right of access to information.
Another perceived risk of abuse was the act’s wide exemption clause which gave 
the State the advantage of being able to cite grave policy reasons for refusal 
without providing any evidence to back up those claims. And since not every 
applicant has a pool of pro bono lawyers behind them, the simple refusal of an 
application has also been another ploy. The sheer expense of legal action has 
shut down many basic queries.
The Privy Council ruling in the case involving Petrotrin’s refusal to disclose 
documents rightly points out the many public interest matters that should be 
weighed by authorities before they decide to block an application for exempt
documents. Separately, High Court Judge Frank Seepersad’s call on Thursday for 
the State to provide evidence to explain exemptions strikes a chord surrounding 
the need for greater transparency in public life.
Prime Minister Dr Keith Rowley’s announcement of a new process in which the 
Ministry of the Attorney General will now review FOI applications to avoid 
needless waste is welcomed. However, such processes should not result in delays. 
Nor should there be duplication given that most public bodies already have paid 
lawyers reviewing these applications.
And while it is laudable Rowley has called on a minister to issue a directive to 
release relevant documents, it must be asked: why does it have to take a prime 
minister and a minister to intervene? What stopped the materials being disclosed 
all along? The real issue here is our culture of secrecy.
In this regard, despite these court rulings, we need to address the 
proliferation of confidentiality clauses and confidential arbitration processes 
in public affairs if we are to truly progress.