We must protect our children

A sterling plea was made by the president of the National Parent Teachers 
Association (NPTA) Raffiena Ali Boodoosingh on Wednesday for the country to wake
up to the reality of teenage pregnancies.
"We as a serious nation have to take a serious look at teenage pregnancy," she 
told the Joint Select Committee of Parliament on Social Services and Public 
Administration looking into the prevalence of teenage pregnancy.
It was not the first time the issue had been highlighted in that forum. Just 
weeks ago it was revealed that in the four year period 2014 to 2018, some 3,777
teen pregnancies were recorded.
Even more shocking, though, was that on Wednesday Ali Boodoosingh revealed that
three primary pupils were among the growing number who were pregnant. In fact,
there were among 169 pregnant children and teens in the last five years and the 
JSC heard that some of them were so sexually active they don't know who the 
father of their child might be.
Statistics by district provided by the Ministry of Education show that 59 of the
cases were from Port-of-Spain and environs, 31 from St George East, 25 from
North Eastern, 16 from Victoria, 17 from South Eastern, 15 from Caroni and 6 
from St. Patrick.
Ali Boodoosingh hit the nail on the head when she pointed out this trend of 
children making children is a cause of the societal ills the country faces 
today.
More than a decade ago, a 2004-2005 study by a team from UWI St Augustine headed
by Dr Joan Rawlins concluded that teenage pregnancy is a risk factor with 
socio-economic implications for the mother and the child in terms of health,
income, employment and marital status. We should be concerned that all these
years later, despite the statistics available to the Ministry, no one saw it
necessary to address the problem head-on. 
Some years ago there a public service ad advised the nation's young people that 
"the only safe sex is marital sex." Maybe it's time to resurrect this message.
Social media is being widely used by students to record their peers indulging
in un-school-like activity, exposing these acts to the nation. Parents, teachers 
lawmakers and others interested in the development of this country cannot bury
their heads in the sand and hope that the problem goes away.
The 169 cases of pregnancy among students point to a high incidence of
statutory rape and the need for laws to be enforced. This country is already 
beset by serious, heinous crimes and can ill afford for this trend to continue.