Too angry for our own good

Rage seems to be contagious across the country these days, with more and more citizens walking and driving around 
seemingly angrier than usual.
Already this week there have been two incidents - one of which was widely shared on social media - of hate-filled outbursts
of anger, these are just the latest in all too frequent situations where citizens resort to violence as the first option, 
sometimes for the simplest of disputes.
These rage-filled outbursts can often lead to situations in which the people involved, on later reflection, are likely 
to regret their actions.
Case in point, Monday's dramatic incidents - one on a a busy highway where a domestic dispute escalated into violence,
then even the more alarming case of a primary school teacher who was stabbed viciously and repeatedly in full view of her 
Standard Two pupils.
These incidents managed managed to eclipse the frequent outbursts of road rage, witnessed almost daily, where claims of 
"bad drives" rapidly descend into violence with motorists trading blows, expletives and, on too many occasions, resorting
to dangerous driving to get back at the offending parties. This places the reckless drivers and all other road users at
risk, yet such scenes are played out on the nation's roadways with disturbing regularity.
The fact is that these incidents of rage, which occur in the heat of the moment, cannot be excused, although there might 
be some leniency when such cases come up in courts of law as opposed to premeditated actions.
However, the increasing frequency of violence spilling over into homes, workplaces, schools and playgrounds is cause for
concern. It is time for parents, employers and others in positions of authority to recognise this dangerous trend and take
corrective or preventative action as needed.
There is, for example, need for the Ministry of Education to review security arrangements at schools and protocols for
access to school compounds following Monday's stabbing incident in a classroom at the St Pius Boys' Primary School in 
Arouca. Also, the Standard Two pupils who witnessed that attack on their teacher will require counselling to help them 
cope with the mental and emotional aftermath of that experience.
Rage attacks are emotionally toxic and upsetting for all parties involved, so the relevant authorities need to develop
systems to prevent, or quickly intervene before a vicious cycle is established.
Usually, it is the rage incidents that result in fatalities that get more attention in this country. However, aggressive
behaviour, dangerous driving and even the upsurge in cyberbullying and other negative online activities are signs of the 
many angry, stressed and worried people among us who are in need of help.
Like the murder rate, this contagion must be contained and services and support systems, along with public education, 
need to be more easily accessible. We are becoming too angry for our own good. 