Breaking the inertia

IN commenting on the latest jailbreak investigation, Prof Ramesh Deosaran has 
raised the important and befuddling issue of institutional and individual 
inertia. Everyone who has lived here long enough would recognise the truth of 
his statement that “it remains quite intriguing how with such serious matters, 
this country seems to enjoy reinventing the wheel”.
The ease with which even the most important matters are consigned to instant 
oblivion is such an ingrained part of the national culture that one government 
politician could blithely say “yesterday was yesterday and today is today”.
Even at the highest levels of national leadership, people with decades of 
schooling and multiple degrees, including in history, know very little about 
previous research and analysis of great relevance to their current 
responsibilities. Government ministries and State agencies are replete with 
reports of all kinds, filled with facts, data, analysis and recommendations 
about which current administrators not only have no clue, but apparently have no 
interest in either. We are forever discovering our problems as if for the first 
time, investigating them as if fresh, and looking for solutions as if the 
problem had never been addressed. This is not a new issue but the fact that it 
remains so resistant in an age where so much information is literally at our 
very fingertips is, as Prof Deosaran puts it, intriguing.
In cutting off ourselves from the past, we deprive ourselves of the critical 
asset of institutional memory which is so important for maintaining a trajectory 
of progress and development from one era to another. Perhaps administrative 
insecurity is responsible for a culture that is repeatedly reinventing the wheel 
instead of building on the achievements of the past. Or maybe it is the 
instinctive deflection of political expediency. Whatever the reason, it has 
resulted in a waste of time, effort, expertise and money and the dismissal of 
very good work that is worthy of application.
The point to be made about the recent escape of eight prisoners is that although 
the names and dates change, the fundamental problems remain the same and have 
been analysed ad nauseam. The answers are not going to change. What needs to 
change is the official response which remains one of paralysis when what is
needed is a commitment to managing problems through to solutions.
It is simply bizarre to see how government after government ducks the 
responsibility for solving the country’s most serious problems and, having 
failed, turns around and blames everyone else. Prison reform and transformation 
of the Police Service are matters that have been addressed decades ago by truly 
eminent minds. And yet, every administration comes to the challenge with a blank 
sheet as if seeing the problem for the first time. So distrusting has the 
population become that it no longer places its faith in any promise. The level 
of public cynicism is an indictment on the quality of national governance. The 
only way any government will convince the public otherwise is by taking down all 
the reports parked up on its shelves, dusting them off, reading them through and 
committing itself to soldiering on to the point of solution.