Another day for gratitude

One hundred and seventy four years after the first East Indians landed in 
Trinidad as indentured labourers, the variety of cultures and the different ways 
of seeing, being and living of those 143,939 persons who arrived here over the 
72 years of that programme have now fully seeped and woven themselves into what 
is today recognised as the unique culture of Trinidad and Tobago.
Despite the colonial legacy of division, all Trinidad and Tobago should take 
pride in the fact that out of the many peoples who were either brought by force 
or voluntarily sought opportunity here, we have somehow managed to escape the 
cultural conflagrations currently threatening some of the oldest and most 
storied democracies of the world.
In a world where the issue of identity is a matter of increasing contention and 
where once-settled nations are being torn apart by rising xenophobia regarding 
those deemed to belong and not belong, all Trinidad and Tobago should take a 
moment on this Indian Arrival Day to cherish our ability to negotiate difference 
and celebrate inclusiveness.
Earlier in our history, the status quo required an abandonment of identity as a 
condition for entering the so-called mainstream. But thanks to the courage of 
cultural warriors, most of the large variety of communities which constitute the 
mosaic that is modern Trinidad and Tobago can stand proudly in the identities 
they claim as their own—most but not all, since discrimination on the basis of 
sexual orientation remains a legal weapon in the hands of the State.
The one great disappointment has been the failure of the education system to 
support the development of a society on the basis of cultural respect. As the 
place where we all meet, schools are best positioned to serve as a key vector 
for the transmission of cultural knowledge and understanding. But the challenge 
of transforming the education system from a purveyor of stereotypes based on the 
values of the old cultural status quo appears to have overwhelmed those 
responsible for shaping the curriculum.
Fortunately, where the State and other institutional interests have failed, 
others have stepped into the breech. Communities, geographical and otherwise, 
have carried the bulk of the responsibility for building and strengthening the 
bridges for accessing and providing support for survival and sustenance.
Enough generations have passed for us to recognise the ancestry of each of us 
in all of us. In Trinidad and Tobago we have the great fortune to be inheritors 
of all the great civilisations of the world from which to craft our own new 
great civilisation. Despite the ongoing negotiation and contestation which 
flavour the news on an almost daily basis, our country represents the one big 
idea of inclusiveness that is most needed in a world gripped by fear of the 
Other.
As we embrace the East Indian culture that resides within all of us, let us give 
thanks and express our gratitude to those who crossed the Kala Pani and chose to 
make this place their home and, in so doing, added their contribution to the 
chemistry that created this unique place called Trinidad and Tobago.