Fair and open on Tobago airport project

In January, Finance Minister Colm Imbert announced that upgrades to the ANR 
Robinson Airport in Tobago and the Tobago marina project in Canoe Bay would 
continue, despite concerns arising from the abrupt withdrawal of Sandals from 
the planned project in Buccoo.
The scope of the project includes upgrades to the existing terminal, originally 
built in 1953 and last refurbished in 2016, transforming it into a dedicated 
terminal for inter-island traffic and cargo flights. A new terminal building to 
serve international passengers is planned. To accommodate these considerable 
alterations, 84 acres of adjacent lands at Crown Point and Bon Accord will be 
acquired by the government.
In May, Tobago West MP Shamfa Cudjoe announced that the project would affect 109 
residents in 33 households, ten businesses and two farmers. Given how much the 
planners know about the impact of the project, the brewing conflict between 
landowners owning affected plots seems unnecessary and needlessly provocative.
The first consultation on the project was held in May 2018 and at a second in 
April, THA minority councillor Dr Faith B Yisrael found much wanting. According 
to the councillor, the THA had no representatives on the panel and claimed that 
representatives of Nidco, the state agency responsible for the project, still 
had no answers for questions posed by the residents at the 2018 consultation.
Social surveys of the affected landowners resulted in a 75 per cent response 
rate, 11 subjects declined to provide information, three referred questioners 
to their representatives and ten were not found. Section three legal notices 
have been issued to landowners, the first stage in the land acquisition process. 
This serves as notification that the state will enter the property for surveys 
and studies. These landowners can expect a section four notice in two months, a 
formal notification that they can submit their claims for recompense to the 
commissioner of valuations. The project’s managers have set November 2019 as 
their deadline for the completion of land acquisition to achieve a construction 
deadline of December 2020.
The decision by the THA Chief Secretary Kelvin Charles to meet with residents on 
a one-on-one basis seems to fly in the face of the kind of transparency and 
clarity that should hallmark a public sector mandatory land acquisition 
initiative. Residents complain of a lack of genuine consultation on the project 
and to be fair, the days of launching a project by posting notices ahead of 
buy-in by affected residents should have been long behind us.
Residents don't consider the process either fair or open, and the THA Chief 
Secretary should respond to their calls to intervene by insisting on appropriate 
public discussion of the matter.