Full-blown crisis

HAVING come late to an appreciation of the Venezuelan refugee crisis, the 
Government has now devised an intensive two-week registration process with the 
aim of capturing basic data on how many are here, who are they, where they are 
staying and so on.
For this process to yield useful and actionable data, Venezuelan refugees, 
especially those who entered the country illegally, will have to trust the T&T 
Government enough to come out of hiding and declare themselves to the 
authorities. Judging from some of the questions being asked by Venezuelans about 
the registration process, there is still much work to be done.
National Security Minister Stuart Young, who is spearheading the initiative, 
must know that its success depends heavily on convincing the target population 
to step out of the shadows.
Minister Young is right to be concerned about the impact of rumour and
fear-mongering on the success of the registration exercise. As one anxious 
Venezuelan told this newspaper, many will wait to hear from others who have 
engaged it to determine whether they should step forward or not. Minister Young 
should not be surprised if individuals with criminal records don’t show up given 
his disclosure that T&T’s intelligence agencies have compiled a “red-flag list” 
of criminals based on information from Interpol. Although he did not indicate 
that such persons will be deported, they are likely to avoid getting on the 
authorities’ radar.
In trying to push Venezuelans to get registered, Minister Young has been 
emphatic in saying that anyone who is picked up as an unregistered illegal will 
be deported. While that sounds serious enough, the reality is that many 
undocumented Venezuelan immigrants are still successfully able to evade the 
police and immigration.
To back up that position, immigration and the Police Service will have to 
dedicate significantly more resources to the task of finding such persons. As 
the scale and impact of the refugee crisis begin to reveal themselves in their 
full dimensions, the salient point to be made is the failure of the 
administrations of the People’s Partnership and the People’s National Movement 
in preventing the problem from getting to this point. Thousands of refugees are 
now thickly spread over the country while remaining outside the system where 
they can be exploited without consequences while utilising resources earmarked 
for citizens. This is not the best of worlds for either side and Trinidad and 
Tobago could have been spared this fiasco with better governance from both 
parties.
The huge number of illegal immigrants is directly linked to the failure to 
patrol areas of the coastline accessed by illegal vessels.
It was a colossal mistake of the People’s Partnership administration to cancel 
the order placed by the Manning administration for Offshore Patrol Vessels which 
would have provided critical service from the time Venezuelans began fleeing 
their country. More secure borders would have served as a disincentive, 
including to those who packed into over-crowded vessels and lost their lives. 
In its turn, the Rowley administration was far too slow in recognising the 
building crisis, perhaps due to its focus on the Dragon Gas deal.
Now, the challenge is to work our way out of a full-blown crisis.