Counting the Venezuelans

BEGINNING with an obvious fact—no one knows how many Venezuelan immigrants are 
within our borders—disagreement about numbers becomes irrelevant and a 
distraction from the core issue of how this country addresses a problem that has 
been years in the making with little official intervention.
Between acting Prime Minister Colm Imbert and Chief Immigration Officer 
Charmaine Gandhi-Andrews, the following data have been trapped: 3,800 Venezuelan 
immigrants are here legally; 9,080 are here through legal ports of entry but 
have overstayed their time and 12,257 have registered as refugees with the UNHCR 
between 2016 and 2019. That totals 25,137. The hard reality is that not Mr 
Imbert nor Ms Gandhi-Andrews or the UNHCR knows how many of our neighbours have 
been smuggled here over the years.
It is doubtful, too, how many Venezuelans will make use of the two-week 
registration exercise scheduled to begin today. Rhonda Maingot, director of the 
Living Water Community, the implementing partner to the UNHCR, is on record 
casting experiential doubt on how many Venezuelans are likely to come forward. 
Some may register, she told a TV morning show last week, but some have told her 
they will not register because they feel vulnerable. One assumes that 
vulnerability will be greater for those immigrants feeling political 
persecution.
Notwithstanding guesswork on numbers, the Government should not have been 
waiting to be told that the costs of receiving immigrants fleeing to Trinidad’s 
shores could be seriously burdensome. The inflow of people from the neighbouring 
republic seeking succour in this country has picked up since announcement of the 
registration arrangements. Today’s start for registration, which provides for 
legal status and permission to work for one year, announced as it was in early 
April, prompted a further spike in arrivals over the past weeks.
Certainly, as boatloads of the needy and the desperate kept coming, some policy 
and programme determinations had to be made without undue delay. Preparations 
for the Venezuelan Migrant Registration Process must have included some costing. 
Figures for the two-week rental of as major a facility as the Queen’s Park Oval, 
one venue of the registration process, must be eye-opening, but the proprietors 
declined to make any such disclosure. Nor has such information come from 
National Security Minister Stuart Young who, at least for the start of the 
process, will be out of the country anyway.
Launching its Financial Stability Report this week, the Central Bank has worked 
with what it calls a “reasonable” figure of 40,000 Venezuelans to be 
accommodated. The Bank factored in expenses for, among other things, social 
services, education, health, subsidies, and security, and came up with an 
estimate reaching $620 million a year.
The bank’s Governor Dr Alvin Hilaire has made clear that the cost of putting up 
an estimated three per cent of the population counts as a basis for seeking 
international assistance, possibly from the IDB. Will the Government take such 
advice? “We will push to our utmost,” Dr Hilaire vowed. Realistically, the 
Central Bank should not need to “push” in a direction where common sense should 
lead.