Make haste with prison break report

Prisons Commissioner Gerald Wilson has been forceful in insisting on the 
thoroughness of the investigation he has launched into the latest prison break 
involving inmates at the remand prison in Arouca. This escapade involved the men 
sawing their way out of cells and, improbably, evading eyes at the prison 
complex, clearing the compound which is secured by three fences in some places.
Commissioner Wilson has asked for a period of 30 days to prepare a report into 
what happened more than two weeks ago, and why. That it should take such a long 
time to begin to settle the national disquiet over this matter has not been 
addressed. But it is a factor worth pondering in and of itself.
Within two days, six of the men were rounded up and returned to their cells, 
hopefully with different arrangements in place which would make such attempts as 
they, or others, may harbour more difficult to stage successfully in the future. 
The Prisons Commissioner is also on record as having allowed that there can be 
no 100 per cent certainty that such a development would not take place again. 
He says this is, simply, part of the reality associated with penal institutions 
all over the world. Maybe. But, coming back to the question of the investigation 
and the answers now expected from it, this is an entirely internal affair, with 
all the relevant parties readily available to provide the proper answers about 
what went wrong on that day.
The officers who were on duty are there. Those who would have been most closely 
in touch with the short-lived escapees are available. The inmates themselves 
have been recaptured and are available to provide first-hand information on how 
they pulled it off. The prison authorities can draw on the expertise of 
non-prison sources as would be deemed necessary for such an investigation.
An anxious public expects, however, to be told precisely what is found out about 
how this latest prison break occurred, four years after the deadly incident at 
the Port of Spain Prison took place, and with no answers forthcoming to date on 
that matter.
In that July 2015 incident, a police officer was killed by inmates who had a gun
and a hand grenade. Prison officers were suspended, based on what information it 
is not yet known. In the absence of such a report, what corrective action which 
may have been taken by the authorities at each of the nation’s prisons in light 
of that 2015 jailbreak remains a mystery to a public rendered even more anxious 
in the face of an unrelenting crime wave across the country.
Questions about the competence and the trustworthiness of members of the Prison 
Service have to be considered in the circumstances under review here. The extent 
to which officers on duty are seen to carry out their responsibilities 
diligently and conscientiously has to be reported on. And the issue of 
management and leadership has to be re-examined, along with operations systems 
and procedures.
Above all, however, is the duty of the decision-makers to make these findings 
public.