Electing for full transparency

THE Miscellaneous Provisions (Local Government Reform) Bill, 2019, had its first 
reading in Parliament on Friday. The bill was tabled in the name of the Minister 
of Rural Development and Local Government but was not on the order paper. It 
appeared on a supplemental order paper.
During Friday’s sitting, which was Private Members’ Day, there was no 
ministerial statement or policy brief issued in relation to the bill. A first 
reading is purely formal. Still, there is nothing preventing ministers from 
making statements on notice at any sitting, including statements explaining 
legislation pending fuller debate.
All of this is important to bear in mind when it comes to assessing the issues 
raised by this legislation and its potential role in the timing of the local 
government election.
Clause three of the bill proposes to vary the term of office of councillors from 
three years to four. This by itself seems simple enough. But section 11 (4A) of 
the Municipal Corporations Act stipulates that elections are to take place 
“within three months of the expiry of the term of office of the mayor, 
councillors, and aldermen comprising the council.” Therefore, a question arises 
as to whether in changing the tenure of the councillors the election due would 
have to follow suit and be pushed back.
Opposition Leader Kamla Persad-Bissessar has asked the Government whether it 
intends to delay the poll. It’s a legitimate question. Whatever the position of 
the Government, it is clear election processes in this country remain at the 
mercy of the ruling party. This should not be the case.
It’s past time for a radical change. The Constitution and acts of Parliament 
govern the timing of general elections, Tobago House of Assembly elections and 
local government elections. In practice, local government elections have played 
second fiddle to general elections. It’s not hard to imagine why. No government 
wants a mid-term report card showing bad grades ahead of its big examination.
We call on Prime Minister Dr Keith Rowley and Persad-Bissessar to jointly 
sponsor new legislation that would, once and for all, end uncertainties 
surrounding elections. It’s time for a fixed-term Parliament law. Saying 
elections will happen when they “are due” – a tack adopted by both the PNM and 
the UNC when in power – is not good enough since any government can, through 
Parliament, redefine the due date. It’s wrong for representation to be held 
hostage by political parties.
Meanwhile, the Elections and Boundaries Commission is long due for another 
review, similar to the one undertaken by Justice Lennox Deyalsingh.
Even if there is a need for flexible dates pending reform, at the very least 
governments should adopt a policy of maximum disclosure. They should not table 
legislation with potentially serious implications without being upfront. Full 
transparency should be carved into the law.