Exam breaches require tough action

Education Minister Anthony Garcia's tough talk about severe penalties for 
students who cheated at CSEC Maths examination this week is of no comfort to 
citizens of this country.
What Mr Garcia needs to tell the country is why there were not enough 
invigilators to oversee the examination at the Tranquility Government School 
where the breach occurred. There is online video footage showing that no 
invigilators were in the exam room and students were seen walking around and 
talking during the writing of the exam.
This alone raises questions about the numbers of supervisors recruited, the 
stringency of the process used to recruit them and also points to, at the very
least, a need for review of the parameters within which they function.
The invigilators in this incident were dismissed on grounds of "inadequate 
supervision at the examination centre." Is it that the ministry has already 
determined the invigilators left the students on their own? If so, then surely
the very ministry was not robust enough in their screening and hiring of the 
staff required.
The incident has seriously compromised an examination that is critical to the 
future of hundreds of young people and based on the proof captured on the video,
the Caribbean Examinations Council (CXC), which administers the CSEC exams, will
have to determine whether the students involved will be disqualified from the 
maths exam and barred from entry to future examinations.
This is not the first time there has been a breach of a CSEC exam. In 2017, 
there were claims the Maths paper had been leaked.
In those circumstances, while it is all well and good for the Education ministry
to now warn examination candidates against unfair or dishonest practices, there 
must be a thorough investigation to determine how this group of students were 
able to commit breaches of CXC regulations. They must also determine who 
videotaped what was happening in the examination room.
On the flip side, the fact that students so brazenly broke the rule is an 
indictment of the society in which we live. That so many young people are led to
wrongdoing without considering the consequences shows the extent to which ethics
and values have been severely eroded. 
As far as we know, students are not allowed to go into examination rooms with 
any digital devices. Were the necessary checks done to ensure they did not have
devices? If not, who is to blame?
Discrepancies and inefficiencies in the conduct of examinations cannot be 
tolerated . Too much is at stake, especially when so many young people study 
hard, spending sleepless nights and attending extra lessons to prepare for these
CSEC exams. 
How unfortunate it is that the actions of a dishonest few will now add a burden
of stress and worry to the majority who are following the rules as they write
these critical exams.
THis calls for swift and decisive action.   