Dry season standoff needs to end

It is hard to see any winners emerging in the current standoff between the 
Water and Sewerage Authority (WASA) and food-crop farmers over the extraction
of water from waterways across the country. There are legitimate concerns on 
either side. However, at the height of this severe and protracted dry season 
some unavoidable heavy-handed actions by agents of WASA and equally strong 
reactions from the farming community are cause for concern.
WASA, which has done a very poor job of promoting water conservation, has of 
late embarked on enforcement activities which only help to reinforce its 
reputation as one of the more unpopular of the country's state agencies. Their
prime target in recent weeks has been the farmers whom they accuse of illegally
extracting water to irrigate their fields. Water pumps, hoses and other 
equipment have been seized and charges laid against some farmers.
Not surprisingly, the response from the farmers has been outrage, with protests
and lawsuits flying around in recent days. There was a noisy protest by some 
disgruntled farmers in Debe over the weekend and warnings that the situation 
could deteriorate further unless there is some intervention to bring matters 
back on an even keel.
While WASA may be following the letter of the law in this situation, the absence
of dialogue and co-operation before the utility launched these crackdowns on 
farmers leaves much to be desired.
So while it is all well and good for Public Utilities Minister Robert Le Hunte 
to defend the actions of WASA's estate police officers against farmers in 
Aranguez, San Juan and Bon Air Gardens, Arouca, perhaps there should have been
a conversation with his Cabinet colleague, Agriculture Minister Clarence 
Rambharat, about drought contingencies for the agriculture sector and perhaps 
warnings to the farmers to apply for permission to extract water before such
action occurred.
It is not as though this harsh dry season came upon T&T without warning. There 
was a window of time before conditions set in for preparation, raising of 
awareness and ensuring measures were put in place.
The farmers, for their part, also needed to properly prepare. However, the two 
sides should have met—in fact, such a meeting still needs to take place—to 
address issues of irrigation and water extraction and all related concerns about 
compliance that are now being aired in ways not likely to bring about a 
resolution.
Even now, it should be possible to deal with concerns about water conservation 
and food security. Instead of directives and punitive actions, the farmers 
should be given an opportunity to secure the water extraction licenses they 
need to pull water from rivers near their fields.
There also needs to be discussions around longer-term arrangements, such as 
developing enough small damns, reservoirs and retention ponds and irrigation 
facilities to meet the farmers' needs.
This is something the relevant ministers and farmers' representatives should 
consider now before the situation gets further out of hand.