Let the creative economy take flight

The T&T Fashion Company Limited (FashionTT), as a subsidiary of T&T Creative 
Industries Company Limited (CreativeTT), should be doing more to encourage more
initiatives like the recently concluded O2N Style.
It is the type of event that showcases the untapped potential within the local
fashion industry. 
Indeed, Nicole Dyer-Griffith, the visionary behind O2N, who has joined forces 
with industry veteran Richard Young to develop the project into a successful 
regional showcase of Caribbean style, has managed to accomplish a significant
portion of FashionTT's mandate.
It is, after all, the state agency created for the purpose of stimulating and 
facilitating the business development and export activity for T&T style.
In just a few short years, Mrs Dyer-Griffith has taken to the O2N concept to 
Antigua, Guyana, and even New York with much success. 
Along the way, her initiative has expanded from a two-day affair to week-long 
programme which culminated this past weekend with O2N Style 2 at O2 Park in 
Chaguaramas.
With this latest success, O2N is now firmly established as a platform for 
creativity, empowerment and entrepreneurship. 
Mapping out a strategic direction for T&T's fashion industry hardly requires 
starting from square one. 
Industry stakeholders like fashion designers Meiling, Claudia Pegus, Heather 
Jones and so many others, have already demonstrated the marketability of 
Caribbean inspired apparel. 
This is the template FashionTT should be working with, harnessing the wealth of 
talent and experience that already resides in this country, not only among our 
many acclaimed fashion designers but also the beauticians, graphic artists, 
visual artists and so many others in the creative sector.
What O2N successfully did was bring all this talent together in a single space. 
The challenge is for FashionTT to now provide the tangible support for T&T 
distinctive and evolving brand of Caribbean style to take its place on the 
global catwalk alongside Paris, London, New York and Milan.
The drive now to help more industry players to become more competitive and 
export driven, moving beyond niche local and regional markets.
Unlike the heavy industry, on which this nation has been too heavily dependent 
for far too long, fashion and the creativity that drives it cannot be depleted. 
There is vast potential for development and expansion, becoming a new source of
wealth for the nation. 
This week, Prime Minister Dr Keith Rowley is on an overseas mission, meeting 
with energy executives in Europe and the United States in the hope of securing
agreements that will benefit T&T. 
However that trip does not advance the cause of economic diversification, a 
critical step in developing the resilience this country needs to be shielded 
from global shocks like volatile energy prices.
Fashion is one of the sectors that can drive that much-needed diversification 
away from oil and gas and O2N has demonstrated just how it can be done. 