Act now on Siparia West chaos

Startling claims of rampant sex and violence at the Siparia West Secondary 
School are yet another reflection of a complete breakdown of discipline in the 
nation's schools. 
The Ministry of Education has in effect thrown the ball back at the school's 
administration, pointing out that the issues are leadership and management
matters to be determined at the school level.
In the past, the ministry has been much more forceful in assisting school 
principals in removing disruptive and violent students by assigning them to 
learning enhancement centres.
We suggest that Minister of Education Anthony Garcia, school supervisors and the
school's principal, as well as representatives of TTUTA, and the PTA, meet 
urgently to find immediate solutions to this serious problem before a student, 
teacher or parent is grievously injured.
In the instant case, the allegations involving a pregnant student of the school
must be swiftly investigated and dealt with. The onus is on the school's 
administrators to lead by example on issues of discipline like these.
The fact that the school's population has dropped by two thirds—from 1,500 
students to 500—is indicative of the frustration of those who are seeking to
learn in an environment that is simply not conducive to such activity. 
This is not the only place an additional burden on parents, who must now find 
alternative schools for their children but adds to their financial strain as 
costs for transportation and replacement of books and uniforms are sure to add 
up.
The principal of the Siparia West Secondary must be given the necessary support 
to suspend or even remove repeat offenders from the school. Parents also have 
the significant responsibility of assisting school officials in restoring order. 
Learning institutions should not be seen as intimidating places or security 
risks. 
In addition, schools should not be turned into for juvenile detention centres 
where police and guards patrol the corridors. Significant sums of money are 
already spent by taxpayers to erect tall fences with razor wire to keep students 
safe on school compounds. Those who do not appreciate or care to be part of a 
safe learning environment should thus be removed after due process.
For starters, the obscene graffiti on the walls must be painted over by the 
students themselves so that they can appreciate the sanctity of the buildings 
and have a sense of pride, not only in their uniforms but the institution 
itself.
Installation of security cameras, more security guards, more guidance 
counsellors and programmes to build team spirit can only do so much.
With the Caribbean Secondary Education Examinations in progress, students who 
have spent the last five years preparing to move ahead should not be put at 
further disadvantage. They and the school's stakeholders need to demand much 
more.