Development can't be at any cost

The haste with which NIDCO chairman Herbert George has dismissed concerns raised
by biologist Dr Stanton Belford about the environmental impact of the proposed
Toco Port, even go so far as to describe the issues pointed out by an 
experienced academic as "alarmist," is of itself alarming.
By his own admission, Mr George has not even the letter in which Dr Belford 
outlined his concerns, so his hasty conclusion, dismissing years of research by 
a university professor, is hardly a robust defence of the environmental impact 
assessment commissioned by the agency.
All the NIDCO chairman's statement has served to do is raise doubts about the 
project, as well as the preparatory work and studies done by entities like the 
Environmental Management Agency (EMA).
Development can't be at any cost. The value of locating a port in Toco has to be
carefully weighted against the impact on sensitive, natural ecosystems. 
Dr Belford is not some fly by night activist but a highly qualified researcher
who has been studying Toco's Grande L'Anse coral reef for the past 15 years.
Since his scientific studies pre-date the port project by many years, they are 
worthy of some serious consideration. 
He deserves, at the very least, the professional courtesy of his letter and his
research papers being given more than a cursory glance.
Let us not view this matter from the usual narrow political perspective but give
consideration to a range of opinions and positions. That will lessen the risk of
rushing into a project that might have some long term negative effects on the 
country.
While in theory and from an economic perspective the Toco port seems to promise 
many benefits, there will be no real gains it comes at a heavy environmental 
cost. 
The very same Ministry of Works that is now embarking on a costly programme to 
repair coastal erosion cannot be allowing one of its agencies, namely NIDCO, to
preside over a project that could bring that erosion and other environmental
problems to Toco.
The Grande L'Anse coral has for centuries been shielding that section of the 
Toco coastline from the force of incoming waves.
It is a proven scientific fact that coastlines protected by reefs are more 
stable. In addition reefs, contribute to natural beach replenishment. 
Fisheries also benefit from coral reefs, so there is a yet to be quantified 
economic benefit from safeguarding Grande L'Anse. Sustainable coral reef 
fisheries in other parts of the world bring in billions of dollars in revenue.
Dr Belford, a son of the soil, deserves a hearing from NIDCO, the EMA.
At the very least, the validity of his concerns should have been determined, not
dismissed without even being read. Mr George, this ball is back in your court.