Eye on the hurricane

WE ARE in the middle of a severe dry season, with the question of water supply 
so fraught WASA and farmers have battled things out in court. Those matters are 
at an end, but the dry weather belies the approach of the hurricane season, 
which will officially begin next Saturday and for which we must take steps to 
prepare.
On Monday, the first named storm of the season, Storm Andrea, arrived ahead of 
time. Though the nascent storm, which formed east of the Bahamas, lasted a few 
hours it was a reminder of the unpredictability of the hurricane season and why 
efforts must be made to be as ready as possible
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration in the US is predicting a 
“near-normal” season with between nine to 15 named storms. But that should not 
make anyone complacent. The 1963 hurricane season was expected to be near 
average as well. In the end, it featured one of the deadliest hurricanes on 
record, Hurricane Flora, which passed over Tobago, reaching sustained winds of 
145 miles per hour.
We endorse the call of Earl Hernandez, the chief of operations at the Tobago 
Emergency Management Agency, for plans to be put in place to ensure the agency 
is ready for this year’s season. In fact, such plans should have already been 
put in motion. And not just for Tobago.
All of our national resources should be audited and properly bolstered. While 
the dry season is expected to last longer than normal, its severity is a sign 
that the risk of serious damage from ordinary rainfall is higher than normal. 
Flash-flooding, caused by greater run-off, is likely to occur, no matter the 
severity of the systems that are to come.
Hernandez has urged the public to be vigilant, which means being aware of local 
infrastructure and shelters, preparing homes, taking stock of emergency 
supplies, and devising plans of action in the event of an emergency.
With the Office for Disaster Preparedness and Management having weathered 
criticism in the past over its response to flooding, it too must ensure it is 
not caught off guard. The prolonged dry season may be an opportunity for 
dredging and any overdue infrastructural work to take place and local 
authorities and state-level agencies should co-ordinate. Have we learned from
our past experiences? Do agencies review performance with a view to improving?
The unusual weather patterns all over the world, including in the US where 
violent tornados tore across Missouri this week, also point to the need for 
analysis of shifting patterns and the impact of human development and climate
change. We talk about the need to conserve water resources and to prepare, but 
have we analysed the deeper issues, like how climate change has directly 
affected local patterns?