Opening our eyes to prison reality

Public eyes, disbelieving and despairing, which turned to the prisons over 
sensational news of a successful eight-inmate escape from Golden Grove Remand, 
are being invited to focus on what is to be done.
For most citizens, life and work behind the walls and the bars are difficult to 
imagine.
When incidents occur, some as horrific as the murders of prison officers, people 
are moved to wonder just what is going on inside that ultimate institution 
within the criminal justice system, and to fear the impact on all outside.
However, little interest is sustained to press for improvements in conditions 
both for the inmates and their guards, and, fundamentally, for a system overhaul 
that would cap the amount of time accused are on remand awaiting their day in 
court.
A slew of legislative amendments contained in the Administration of Justice 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, designed to fast forward the laggardly system, has 
thus far borne little appreciable fruit to the benefit of the entire system. 
Inadequate number of court rooms and non-functioning facilities add to the 
notorious backlog in the criminal justice system.
The hopeful expectation of the launch of the Prison Service’s edition of the I 
Support Our Service (ISOS) initiative is that the Prison Service will benefit 
from the ISOS’ efforts at widening citizens’ awareness and harnessing corporate 
sponsorship of initiatives towards rehabilitation and reform.
The launch afforded the Prisons Commissioner and the head of the Prison 
Officers’ Association opportunities to update the public about their respective 
portfolios.
With the eight escapes fresh in memory, Prisons Commissioner Gerard Wilson, now 
recognised for his outspoken readiness to treat with the media, enlarged upon 
the dread conditions endured by remanded inmates.
Innocent until proven guilty, they are nevertheless liable to spend more than a 
decade inside the Remand Yard’s no-man’s-land circumstances of being neither 
convicted nor free.
Commissioner Wilson elaborated on the absence of reform programmes aimed at 
turning around the lives and behaviours of those indeterminately awaiting trial.
The actual prison experience of those remanded turns out to be worse than that 
of convicted felons.
After a remand spell, inmates “leave the system...worse than before”, and 
candidates for involvement in crimes, he said.
He called for “serious conversations” about “what we do with the remand 
facility”.
While the Prison Officers Association head assessed his members’ morale at an 
all-time low, the Prisons Commissioner, taking in the big picture, compellingly 
expressed a forward-­thinking consciousness: “It is time we stop running behind 
crime and start running behind the causes of crime.”