Fix flaws in prison system now

Yesterday's escape from the Remand Yard at the Golden Grove Prison of eight 
inmates, seven of whom are charged with murder, is another example of the 
inadequate security at the nation's prisons.
While the investigations are ongoing into how the men escaped undetected, the 
reality is that this mass jailbreak overnight was only detected when the
customary head count was taken yesterday morning. 
In addition, from the initial information, it appears the escape was well
planned and executed. This is the latest in a line of high profile jailbreaks at
the nation's prisons over the last decade. The unfortunate circumstances
surrounding the escape of Christopher Selby, Hassan Atwell and Allan "Scanny"
Martin from the Port-of-Spain prison, which led to the killing of PC Sherman 
Maynard by one of the escapees and shooting death of Martin by police, are still
undetermined.
Then there was the case of Vicky Boodram who, while charged with more than 140 
counts of fraud, was aided by two police officers in her escape from the Golden
Grove Women's Prison. Steve McGilvery and Leroy Mohammed also managed a 
difficult and dangerous escape from the Carrera Island Prison in 2015.
When you add to this eight prison officers who have been killed in the last four 
years, there is no doubt an ongoing crisis in the nation's prisons.
It is commendable that the security services made good progress in re-arresting
some of the prisoners by last evening but unacceptable that an entire country is
put on edge because eight potentially dangerous men escaped custody.
The Government and wider society have taken too long to recognise there are 
major problems in the prison service. The overcrowding and horrendous conditions
in the remand prison are well known, the risk to prison officers and growing 
gang culture well documented and the actions of rogue prison officers who put
their colleagues and the society at risk continue. 
Until we recognise that the prison is an important part of national security, it
being designed to hold those who have run afoul of the law and rehabilitate them 
in preparation for their return to the wider society, then we are making a 
potentially fatal mistake.
The T&T Prison Service must get to the bottom of this latest escape and provide
the country with a clear explanation of how it happened and what measures are 
being put in place to avoid to repeat.
The Government must meanwhile take action to improve the security and conditions 
at the nation's prisons, while the criminal justice system must be improved to
ensure that people have their day in court in a reasonable time. Years without a
chance to prove your innocence or have your guilt affirmed, as was highlighted 
by one of the escapees, is not good enough and adds fuel to the fire of those 
behind bars.