Make bad cops pay 

POLICE OFFICERS who commit assault and battery on members of the public are 
making taxpayers pay a heavy price. According to figures provided by the Supreme 
Court this week, over the last decade the State has been ordered to pay $3.5 
million in legal damages to people like Darrell Wade, who was beaten in a 
holding cell at a magistrates’ court in December 2009, and Jason Superville, who 
was beaten after he was arrested in December 2010. That’s unacceptable.
Ruling in a lawsuit brought by the two men, the court noted, even more 
distressingly, that there appears to be no correlation between the award of 
exemplary damages and deterrence. Exemplary damages are meant to be punitive, to 
make an example out of people who are found to have done gravely wrong acts, to 
warn members of society that there will be a price to pay for certain types of 
conduct. They are not working.
“It is clear the awards have not achieved their purpose,” said Justice of Appeal 
Judith Jones. “That the awards do not seem to be a deterrent is not surprising 
since these are awards paid by the State and not the offenders.”
And the cases of police abuse keep on happening. For the period under review, 
there were 69 cases in which the State was found liable for assault and battery, 
false imprisonment, and malicious prosecution.
What is even more alarming, however, is the fact that not only do taxpayers pay 
for the misconduct of police officers, but these officers themselves face no 
penalty for their actions. Despite the orders of the court, these officers are, 
in effect, a class untouchable.
“To date, as far as we are aware, there has been no attempt by the State to have 
the offenders penalised for the breaches of the law committed by them,” Jones 
said. “Neither will the awards have such an effect until steps are taken by the 
State to make these offenders personally liable by way of disciplinary 
procedures.”
There is no doubt there are many hard-working women and men in the Police 
Service who are a credit to it. There is also no doubt that under duress 
officers are often asked to make difficult, split-second decisions. But when a 
court of law, reviewing the facts of a case, concludes that an officer has acted 
maliciously, there can be no justification for slapping that officer on the 
wrist.
We endorse the court’s view and go further.
Not only should officers face disciplinary proceedings for misconduct from 
bodies such as the Professional Standards Bureau, the Police Complaints 
Authority and the Police Service Commission, but contracts of employment should 
make officers liable to contribute to the payment of damages if they are 
responsible. In other words, bad cops should pay the price for their actions.