Prison Emergency

Last week's prison break has once again put the spotlight on the glaring 
failures to fully secure the nation's jails.
Good police work quickly led to the capture of six of the eight escapees, seven
of whom are charged with murder, including one who is on 64 charges associated
with the heinous murder of three persons including a 14-month-old baby, and the 
kidnapping of two young women. Those women who are now witnesses for the State, 
experienced extreme terror on learning that one of their torturers had escaped.
To make matters worse, it took hours for the police to check in on them afer
wasting valuable time at the wrong house.
How eight prisoners could have escaped from Remand Yard at the Golden Grove
Prison in Arouca was a mystery until it was revealed that all eight were crowded
into one cell, allowing a level of collusion in the cutting of two bars and the 
removal of a large brick to create a space of about two feet. Through this 
impossibly small space, eight men were apparently able to escape their cells and 
somehow duck the entire security system at the prison compound, scale two 
perimeter fences  and disappear into darkness between Tuesday night and the dawn 
on Wednesday. Fortunately, their freedom was short-lived. Five were recaptured 
within hours with a sixth held the next day. All were caught in the Las Lomas 
area. Two remain at large with a $50,000 reward offered by Crime Stoppers for 
information leading to their recapture. 
In this period of high crime, a prison break is the last thing the country 
needs. In addition to fuelling fear among the public, it also consumes scarce 
police resources which are diverted from other matters to deal with the
emergency. 
One expects that the Commissioner of Prisons and the Minister of National 
Security have both launched investigations into how such an incident could have
happened and that both will soon account to the public for the lapse and outline 
how they plan to ensure it does not happen again.
Planning for better policing at the nation's prisons was announced as high 
priority measure last year following a visit to the Maximum Security Prison at
Golden Grove by National Security Minister Stuart Young and Commissioner of 
Police Gary Griffith following a meeting with prison administrators. That 
initiative came in the midst of several attacks on prison officers by persons
said to be acting on the orders of incarcerated gang leaders who were calling 
shots on officers from behind bars. What action has flowed from that 
announcement is unclear but whatever steps were taken, they are clearly not 
enough to prevent last week's jail-break.
Like the country's water infrastructure, the state of T&T's prisons constitutes
an emergency. The fact that eight men could have been put into one cell speaks
volumes of the archaic infrastructure. 
It is time to face the reality of the urgent need for a significant investment
in prison upgrade and transformation.
Continuing to paper over cracks will only create gaping holes through which 
accused murderers can wiggle their way out of freedom, eight men at a time. 