Children, biggest loser in school war

THE tit-for-tat between the Government and the Opposition over school 
construction serves no one, least of all the children waiting to occupy them.
To these children and their parents, it makes no difference which government 
built them.
They just want to get out of dilapidated and crowded structures and into clean, 
safe and secure premises conducive to learning.
There are many valid questions about the administration of major construction 
programmes initiated by the former People’s Partnership government, including 
the highway extension to Point Fortin, the Children’s Hospital, the Sports 
Complex at Couva, State housing and schools, among others.
Many were rightfully targets of audits by the successor Government of the 
People’s National Movement.
However, after almost four years in office, the Rowley administration owes the 
country more than complaints about the People’s Partnership’s projects. Like 
every government, it was elected on the basis of its promises to do much better 
than the government it sought to replace.
In the case of the school construction projects, the expectation was that the 
Rowley administration would prioritise an audit, fix the problems and get on 
with the task of delivering the schools.
What is in question now is the management of that process under Education 
Minister Anthony Garcia and associated ministers with responsibility for finance 
and legal affairs as well as the Government’s expenditure priorities.
In the late 1970-early 1980s, the population rose up with the cry of “houses 
before horses” to push the Eric Williams government into responding to the 
overwhelming demand for housing. Though initially ignored, the cry was 
eventually heeded by the successor government of George Chambers. Today, with 
the Rowley Government pursuing such high cost projects as the highway to Toco 
while the school construction programme languishes, the issue of priorities and 
choices becomes stark.
The failure to successfully complete the schools under construction is a damning 
indictment against both the People’s Partnership and the PNM governments and 
neither has the moral authority to hold up the other as the villain of the 
piece. Both have failed our children with an impact that is incalculable. Who 
knows what impact the failure to complete and deliver these schools has had on 
the life-chances of the children who are waiting for them to be opened?
There are large questions to be asked about Government oversight of the 
Educational Facilities Company Ltd (EFCL), beginning with the decision of the 
Manning government to establish the company in the first place, the integrity of 
the contract award and management process under the People’s Partnership, and 
the PNM government’s seemingly never-ending audit which, it should also be 
noted, is having a devastating impact on the construction industry. After almost 
four years, the most the Government seems able to say is that contractors’ 
claims amount to some $918 million and consultants’ claims to about $19 million. 
While the Government fiddles with figures, several of the construction companies 
affected by the Government’s non-payment of monies owed to them are having to 
cut back their operations, lay off workers and dig themselves deeper into debt. 
There are no winners in this war, but its biggest loser might be our children.