Great initiative for the youth

It has long been a lament in the national economy, in business and in education,
that the entrepreneurial spirit has been lacking, particularly among school 
leavers and persons seeking to enter the working world.
And equally for decades, several attempts have been aimed at addressing this 
critical need in efforts to create greater buoyancy, as well as to provide
alternatives for young people with ideas for creating their own paths to 
success. 
The Junior Achievement programme started in the early 1970s was one such 
initiative. And from a different approach, there was also the Youth Training and
Employment Partnership Programme (YTEPP). Started in the period of the late 
1980s, this programme created opportunities for thousands of young people 
leaving school with less than job-ready academic qualifications, to learn skills
designed to enhance their employment prospects or create their own 
self-employment opportunities. 
Republic Bank also introduced its "Right Start" programme, as one of several 
initiatives aimed at preparing young graduates, either for the world of work, or
for launching out on their own after periods of apprenticeship.
In our current context, with the economy just appearing to emerge from a period
of another tailspin, and with employment opportunities again in the spotlight, 
the NGO, Youth Business Trinidad and Tobago (YBTT), is reporting positive news
about its programmes promoting entrepreneurship as a career path. 
Especially in a context in which the country's education system, even up to the 
university level, is not turning out the kind of business-oriented graduate, the
YBTT focus over the last decade or so is to be saluted.
The organisation places emphasis on research which seeks to explore promising 
areas fo business pursuits. It runs programmes such as "Jump Start" and "Shell
Live Wire", training participants in developing skills for devising new ideas, 
appraising market potential and boosting productive capacity. 
Funded by the Caribbean Development Bank and the National Enterprises Ltd Co, 
YBTT appeals to firms in the private sector to provide necessary funding for the
provision of loans and grants, to enable young self-starters to get along with 
their ideas and initiatives. The organisation focuses in this phase of its 
advocacy on areas such as agriculture, food, and fashion, no doubt honing in on
where the trends and the societal needs appear to offer greatest potential for 
success. Such ventures as those producing soaps and teas from local agriculture
are being cited as examples of current success.
Its leaders are working with other bright, entrerprising young minds on
development of ventures in such areas as applying artificial intelligence to
manage electricity consumption, and the design of a highly productive machine 
for making pastelles.
As a single example of the spirit being unleashed in this process, an 
18-year-old sixth form student from Plymouth in Tobago is already running a 
successful barbering operation, while continuing studies in business and 
communications. 
There is also the CARIRI Business Hatchery, which offers similar modes of 
training and mentorship for young persons seeking to create their own paths to
success. 
There initiatives deserve all the financial help and support they can get.