The sad state of T&T's air defence

The good news of no injuries or loss of life in the crash landing of a National
Helicopter Services Ltd (NHSL) aircraft on Wednesday is now overshadowed by
the bigger tragedy it exposes - the abysmal state of air resources assigned to
the country's various national security agencies.
The fact that an aircraft not specifically assigned to the Ministry of National
Security with a civilian pilot was being used in the search for prisoners who 
escaped from Golden Grove Prison may have gone totally unnoticed had there not 
been that hard landing in the hills of Arouca. That incident has revealed 
inadequate air defence for T&T.
This raises questions about the operational capacity of the T&T Air Guard 
(TTAG), the unit which is supposed to be protecting and patrolling the country's
airspace, as well as the National Operations Centre (NOC) Air Division. These 
are the agencies from which aircraft should have been deployed for that 
operation.
Information that has been emerging suggests that many of the planes and
helicopters which should be used for transport, search and rescue, liaison and 
other operations connected to the safety and security are currently grounded.
These resources, it seems, have been severely affected by budgetary cuts in the 
last few years which have only added to the mounting issues related to 
management and maintenance. As a result, billions of dollars worth of resources
which should be in active use for surveillance and reconnaissance missions, 
border patrols and drug interdiction are out of commission.
It was not too long ago - in May 2011 - that the state took delivery of two 
Augusta Westland AW139 helicopters followed by two more in July 2012. In 
addition, contracts were signed for four Bell 429 and one Bell 412EPI 
helicopters for the NOC. 
However, the AW 139s have been grounded for several months because of lack of
funds for maintenance
Sadly, after the expenditure of more than US$348 million in the acquisition of
the helicopters as well as training of personnel to operate them, the aircraft
are now locked up in a hangar at Piarco International Airport.
And it is not only the aircraft themselves that are out of commission. 
Night-surveillance systems fitted to the helicopters assigned to the NOC are 
currently non-operational and have been awaiting repairs from quite some time. 
That equipment, for which a tidy sum was spent, is now packed away in boxes at
the NOC Air Division's base in Central Trinidad.
Without adequate air cover, which now seems to be the case, one wonders at the 
level of border security with instability brewing in a country not too far away
and mounting concerns about human, drug and weapons trafficking. 
The question is, who is being held responsible for this sorry state of affairs?
Or will this be another case of looking the other way while billions of much
needed resources go to waste. 