High cost of secrecy

THURSDAY’S announcement by the Prime Minister that he is instructing his 
Minister of Energy to utilise “the authority he has under the Constitution” and 
instruct those responsible to make available the two documents attending the 
State’s decision to discontinue the case against the late Malcolm Jones is as 
puzzling as it is revealing.
It raises questions as to whether, and to what extent, this matter was one which 
engaged the attention of the Cabinet before it became one for the courts.
The matter went all the way to the Privy Council which ruled last week that the 
complainant in the matter, activist Ravi Balgobin Maharaj, must be given his day 
in court in pursuit of the documents.
What the Rowley directive reveals is the fact that the so-called sensitive 
nature of the information contained in those two witness statements appears now 
to have been without merit and they should have been given up without such a 
huge and costly fight.
It is the very cost of the litigation involved in the fight by citizens to 
access information in the public interest which propelled the Prime Minister to 
adopt the position he has.
He railed on Thursday against what he saw as “the way these matters have become 
a cash cow for those who are exploiting it”.
He said as head of the Government, with an eye on “the protection of the public 
purse”, he was advancing a new position intended to make access to public 
information less of the costly legal battle, the results of which we have had 
two examples in the past week alone.
Dr Rowley cited another matter, this one involving the Ombudsman, in which a 
request was filed under the Freedom of Information Act. The Ombudsman lost, with 
the legal costs for the petitioner in that matter put at $1 million.
And in the matter involving the court directive for the Minister of Finance to 
release information previously denied the former governor of the Central Bank, 
more public funds have been expended, with even more to come if, as he has 
stated, the minister goes ahead with his notice of appeal.
What the Prime Minister has put in train is a challenge to the culture of 
secrecy which continues to flourish among State agencies and public officials, 
about which we have commented in this space just two days ago. Such a culture 
prevails in the face of the very Freedom of Information Act whose purpose it was 
to make access easier.
In the current circumstances and with the aid of the Prime Minister’s 
spectacular attempt at breaking the norm, it is worth repeating that such 
tactics being employed by public officials have the effect of defeating national 
aspirations for accountability and transparency.
They also place unnecessary, unwarranted and unfounded blocks in the way of the 
functioning of a free press in the interest of the greater democracy to which 
we all aspire.