More questions than answers about PM's trip

NOT for the first time since leading his party to victory at the polls almost 
four years ago, in this his first term in office, Prime Minister Dr Keith Rowley 
is leading a delegation for talks with some of the world’s energy giants.
The Prime Minister arrived in London early yesterday, headed for the Hague, 
where he is scheduled to meet and sign agreements with executives of Shell.
On the way back he will meet in London with senior executives of BP and EOG 
Resources.
And then the delegation will head to Houston in the USA to meet with what’s been 
reported as “Shell technocrats”. These efforts are ostensibly aimed at putting 
this country in a more settled position regarding our energy future.
The Office of the Prime Minister has been sparing in the provision of details 
about what the substance of this latest mission is.
And while in a disclosure of his own last week the Prime Minister told us he 
would be away for ten days, the official release from his office on Sunday 
provided no return date.
There appears to be a lot riding on the Government’s widening relationship with 
Shell and this can be seen to be brought into sharper focus than might have been 
envisaged a couple months ago.
This was before BPTT announced its inability to provide the natural gas 
necessary to run the operations at the Point Fortin-based Atlantic Train 1.
Shell is the major shareholder in this venture, holding 46 per cent of the 
interest here with BPTT holding a 34 per cent share, the remaining 23 per cent 
being held equally between the National Gas Company and a Chinese concern.
Since inception, BPTT has been supplying 100 per cent of Train 1’s requirements, 
and the Government may well have come to the conclusion that a new arrangement 
with Shell in this regard is now necessary.
What this signals as well is that for this critical period in the country’s 
development, there are serious concerns over the viability of Train 1.
In addition, Shell has recently signed an MoU with Heritage, the company formed 
on the closure of the former Petroleum Company of Trinidad and Tobago-Petrotrin, 
and talks on this mission may also involve necessary enhancement of that 
arrangement.
Further on this agenda is the fact that Shell is the principal private sector 
participant in the proposed Dragon Gas deal between the governments of Trinidad 
and Tobago and Venezuela.
And as uncertainty grows on this arrangement, with the expanding crisis next 
door, both governments may well be looking 
to the company to play an even greater role than formerly envisaged, towards 
making it happen, when the situation eventually stabilises.
But the inclusion in the delegation of the Minister of National Security, even 
given his established role as the Prime Minister’s virtual right-hand man, 
raises questions of its own.
Arrangements and procedures remain to be fully explained with the start of the 
registration of Venezuelan migrants while the minister is abroad and not enough 
clarity on who has been named to hold for him on this assignment.