Averting double trouble

THE CAPTURE of the alleged leader of a gang from Venezuela within our borders 
brings to the fore a messy reality law enforcement authorities have been 
dealing with for some time now. Crime is transnational; this we know. But the 
influx of migrants from Venezuela poses both opportunities and challenges that 
require a special strategic direction. We would wish to fall on the side of 
averting double trouble at all cost.
The traditional arguments, both here and abroad, of those who oppose migration 
tend to focus on the possibility of criminals slipping into the country. We have 
enough crime here already and adding more criminals to the mix poses a double 
threat: heaping pressure on an already strained situation while also engendering 
opportunities for collaboration and syndication which could frustrate both 
anti-crime initiatives and measures designed to stem illegal flows of capital, 
weapons and manpower.
Yet there are two sides to every coin. Some, such as economist Roger Hosein, 
see opportunities to bolster local productivity through an influx of Venezuelan 
labour. But whether this influx will also bolster the productivity of criminal 
elements as well is the worry.
Before the capture of El Culón, the signs that Venezuelan gang warfare has hit 
our streets were already upon us. We witnessed assassinations in broad daylight 
as well as incidents which have been linked in preliminary intelligence reports 
to rumblings in the Venezuelan underworld.
The law enforcement authorities are to be complimented on nabbing El Culón. 
Apart from multiple murders, El Culón is wanted by Venezuelan authorities for 
drug trafficking, kidnapping and other offences. However, his capture raises the 
question: how many other wanted figures have managed to slip into the country? 
And are these figures being captured pursuant to intelligence or by 
happenstance? The latter possibility is cause for concern.
The Ministry of National Security and the law enforcement agencies need to be 
given the resources they need to be effective in handling this angle to the 
crime problem. This includes officials fluent in Spanish, as well as 
information-sharing between agencies on both sides of the Gulf of Paria.
All of this is a reminder of why the registration exercise for Venezuelans needs 
to be done as diligently as possible. This exercise has the potential both to 
assist the authorities while allowing the State to manage an undoubted 
humanitarian crisis.
But registration must be done carefully to safeguard the rights of Venezuelan 
citizens, many of whom are fleeing a situation in which political prosecution 
is rife. Temporary work permits are one thing, a system that subjects people to 
differential treatment is another.
With regard to arrested people, it is hoped they are given access to the courts 
in the form of legal representation and advice, particularly considering the 
shortage of interpreters. Spanish should be our second language and maybe all of 
this will push the State to foster greater knowledge in this regard.