Politics and planning don't mix in T&T 

Assurances over the weekend from National Security Minister Stuart Young of a 
plan for managing the state's military air assets need to be viewed in the 
context of the billions spend and the billions lost over the past few years in 
acquisitions—of expensive military aircraft.
In fact, his statement on Saturday following exclusive Guardian Media reports on 
the woeful state of the T&T Air Guard (TTAG), brings into sharper focus the 
extent of fallouts in programmes and policies every time there is a change of 
government in this country. In efforts to show up shortcomings in the 
administrations of their political rivals, it is commonplace for T&T's two main 
political parties to quickly discard the major projects of the preceding 
government when they return to the corridors of power.
The People's Partnership administration of Kamla Persad-Bissessar did it when 
they took office in May 2010 and Keith Rowley's People's National Movement did 
the same thing in 2015, so neither party has the moral authority to blame the 
other as far as that practice is concerned.
The TTAG is just the latest victim of this ongoing game of political 
brinksmanship which always incurs a significant strain on the Treasury and makes
it almost difficult for proper long term planning to take place. Politics always
gets in the way, highlighting the need for further maturing of the country's 
democratic system.
Now saddled with dwindling air assets, further exacerbated by the resignations
of 17 experienced helicopter pilots who underwent extensive training at 
taxpayers' expense, the current state of the TTAG underscores the extent to 
which planning and politics don't mix in T&T.
In the circumstances, Minister Young's promise of new, integrated air unit to be
added to the country's national security infrastructure is of little comfort, 
especially in the absence of information on funding and how the manpower needs 
of this entity will be met.
As the minister admitted, there is a deficit in the system. What he left unsaid 
is how challenging it will be to fill gaps that should not have been created in
the first place.
With the accuracy of hindsight, it is now clear that the Rowley administration's 
decision to ground helicopters that had been acquired at quite high a cost to 
the country by the People's Partnership was wrong. Added together, much more 
money has been lost than could possibly have been saved even as the country has
been left vulnerable because of inadequate air cover in recent years.
Sadly, this is the same type of political unplanning that cost the country 
SAUTT and other national security infrastructure that is desperately needed now.  