Golden glory for relay runners

A WHIRLWIND flash over 400 metres each by a quartet of young athletes has 
delivered reason for celebration and promise of greater sporting glory in the 
near future for Trinidad and Tobago. At a relatively new world event hosted by
the International Association of Athletics Federations (IAAF), four Trinidad and
Tobago youths again lifted the hearts of a population desperate for good news.
The victor of the four at the IAAF World Relays finals on May 12 in Yokohama, 
Japan, holds promise for the huge World Championships in Dubai scheduled for 
this October and must raise expectations for winning performances in next year's 
Olympics in Tokyo. This is the second time in just about two years that the
4x400 relay team struck gold for Trinidad and Tobago. At the 2017 World 
Championships in London, Jarrin Solomon, Jereem Richards, Machel Cedenio and 
Lalonde Gordon medalled at the top of the table.
Sunday's Japan result, building on the 2017 victory, must put the team in the 
running for the top spot in this event at the Olympics.
Still relatively early in the track season, the stunning display of gritty
determination, will boost the confidence of the athletes and other sportsmen and
women across the country. Won in the last lap, the fastest in the race, when 
anchor Cedenio started a full second behind his US competitor, it was a 
performance of the highest standard required on the international circuit.
Of the 2017 quartet, Richards and Cedenio featured again. That Asa Guevara and 
Deon Lendore numbered among the winning team provides some comfort that there
is sufficient depth in the country's national athletic stables to field runners
on the international circuit. 
Lendore has returned to good fitness and form after injuries and Cedenio, who
ran an epic last leg, showed no sign of psychological trauma derived from his 
personal troubles. Indeed, reports from Japan described Cedenio as "undaunted"
when he was handed the baton, trailing behind the American Paul Dedewo. Cedenio
shaved a couple tenths off the gap as he entered the final turn and pressed 
towards the finish line. 
Registering a good world leading time of 3:00:81 - with Cedenio's 44:41 in the 
last leg, there is more than enough hope reposed in these professional sporting
youngsters.
This newspaper salutes their determination and wishes them God's speed as they 
prepare for Dubai in October and the momentous event of next year's Olympics.