An important judgment

THE Attorney General’s insistence on downplaying the importance of the Privy 
Council’s ruling in favour of citizen Ravi Balgobin Maharaj does not change the 
fact that it has moved the goalpost in favour of transparency and the public’s 
right to know. Further, in the process of doing so, it has opened up a number of 
potentially explosive and very far-reaching issues regarding the Government’s 
decision to withdraw the case against former Petrotrin executive chairman, the 
late Malcolm Jones.
True, this is only the first round in Maharaj’s attempt to force the Government 
to disclose the basis on which it decided to halt the billion-dollar case 
against Jones. However, as opening rounds go, this one has ended with the 
challenger well-positioned for Round Two. He is now armed with the legal right 
to petition the court to disclose the witness statements of former Petrotrin 
executives Charmaine Baptiste and Anthony Chan Tack on which, purportedly, the 
legal opinion to withdraw the case rested.
While nothing should be assumed at this stage, if the Privy Council had agreed 
with the High Court and the Appeal Court and ruled against Maharaj, the entire 
effort would have been shut down.
As it stands now, the process for judicial review as the next step in the quest 
for disclosure is well and truly engaged.
Maharaj’s persistence is important for defining and sharpening the application 
and interpretation of the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA). As the single most 
important legislative tool for enabling the citizen’s right to access 
information in the possession of the State, the FOIA is critical for making the 
State transparent and accountable.
Maharaj is among a small but determined group of citizens who have been serving 
our democracy by making effective use of the FOIA and, in so doing, are 
succeeding in giving the law a certain vibrant muscularity.
When proclaimed, the FOIA was a breakthrough piece of legislation which 
acknowledged the public’s right to know about decisions taken in its name by 
governments. This is the heart of representative government which has 
unfortunately not been the culture of the State, grounded as it is in the 
colonial culture of authoritarian governance.
The assumption by the media and the wider citizenry had been that the FOIA would 
have ushered in a new culture of openness to information-sharing by governments. 
Unfortunately, the FOIA is increasingly being used in a counter-purpose manner 
to frustrate the public’s right to know. This reality is very familiar to the 
media.
Journalists seeking the most basic pieces of information are often being denied 
access and advised to file their requests under the FOIA, only to be told a 
month or more later that the information being sought is exempt from the 
requirement for public disclosure.
In newsrooms where information is time-sensitive, such actions often amount to a 
strategy to kill a story.
Worse, the average citizen asserting the right to know runs the risk of coming 
up against a State that is willing to dig deep into the people’s pockets to 
fight them, even, as AG Al-Rawi put it, for “run of the mill” cases.
