Proper plan for farming water needed

It hardly served any identifiable interest when, without notice, WASA police 
swooped down on Aranjuez farmers and seized their pumps used to draw water for
irrigation purposes. 
It had not been established that the owners and operators of the seized pumps
had been sourcing polluted water. Nor had any authority found the crops
irrigated with such water showing signs of disease-causing contamination. 
The result of such policing amounted to a national-scale controversy, reaching 
Parliament, where Public Utilities Minister Robert Le Hunte defended the 
seizure but said nothing about what could be done to assist farmers. He 
denounced the free sourcing of agricultural water as offences under WASA 
legislation. That Aranjuez farmers had not sought the required permits before 
putting their pipes and pumps in place is now admitted fact. Agriculture 
Minister Clarence Rambharat made it his business to obtain 50 application forms
for distribution so the water-sourcing farmers, apparently ignorant of the 
requirement, can seek to operate within the applicable law.
The Agriculture Minister, inevitably caught in the middle, has been able to 
weigh both the concerns of WASA and production anxieties of the farmers. Nobody
has yet spoken up for the interests of the market shoppers and consumers of 
Aranjuez-grown eggplants, lettuce, watercress, cucumbers, pumpkin and other 
crops which become unavailable because of extended rainless conditions not 
ameliorated by irrigation. 
Meanwhile, the farmers whose pumps were seized, facing potential business
losses, started the process toward court action. WASA too has not ruled out
prosecution; three farmers have since been summoned to court next week to answer 
charges of extracting water from a drain in one instance, and from water courses
in the other two instances.
It is unarguable that the ultimate victims of it all will be the consumers who 
must face higher prices for fresh produce. That it should never have come to 
this is one pressing conclusion. Arrangements for providing adequate water for
crops should long have been in place. Jamaica, once again, is leading the region
in alleviation for farmers. Rather than prosecute, Jamaican authorities are 
considering inter alia, training of farmers in water conservation and in how to
measure the amount of water required for crop irrigation. 
Scientific testing should also have been done on the water being pumped from 
unauthorised sources here in T&T. Safety assurances should not be dependent only
on the visual observations of the Agriculture Minister, the aggrieved farmers,
and Agricultural Society representatives. UWI Agriculture Faculty Dean Wayne
Ganpat was last week warning against taking irrigation water "sources that they 
shouldn't use", since that could use E-coli bacterial infection among those 
consuming drain-water treated crops.
Dr Ganpat called for better planning against climate change-induced droughts and 
recommended application of "technology-driven systems using less water". 
Scientific knowledge and advice are available not far from Aranjuez. The most 
positive outcome of the present impasse would be to close whatever gap exists
between availability of agricultural expertise in St Augustine and need for it 
at Aranjuez.