Valid concerns in amnesty report

Although this country has adopted a non-interventionist stance on the political
crisis in neighbouring Venezuela, Prime Minister Dr Keith Rowley should take
serious note of concerns raised by Amnesty International in a letter to him 
earlier this week.
This is particularly important as Government has just embarked on a period of
registration of Venezuelan migrants so they can live and work here for a year 
without fear of deportation. 
There are very valid concerns that the verification exercise which is part of 
the process involve the sharing of information that could put the migrants, 
particularly those fleeing political persecution, at risk. That means that as
much as Dr Rowley and his administration have been unwilling to take sides, they
have limited options in managing the crisis that is spilling unto our shores and 
will have to carefully manage the registrations of migrants.
In addition to ironing out the technical and operational glitches in the 
process, Government might want to pay attention to the Amnesty International 
report referenced in the letter to Dr Rowley which points to "a systematic and 
widespread policy of repression" by the Nicolas Maduro regime which may 
constitute crimes against humanity.
The report, Hunger for justice: Crimes against humanity in Venezuela, chronicles 
more than 8,000 extrajudicial executions by Venezuela's security forces between 
2015 and 2017 and notes a recent escalation of grave human rights violations.
A research mission in February found that between January 21 and 25 when there 
were mass protests against Maduro's government, at least 47 people in 12 of the 
country's 23 states were killed during the protests, all of them from gunshot 
wounds. At least 33 of these people were killed by state security forces and 
six were killed by third parties, Amnesty International found.
These are not claims that should be swept under the carpet. While the purpose of 
verification of the migrants is to weed out the criminal elements among them, 
that doesn't eradicate all risks. If political refugees fleeing persecution can 
be tracked down through the information provided during the registration 
process, this adds another element of danger which T&T may be ill-equipped to 
stave off.
Fear and uncertainty might very well be the reason not as many migrants as had 
been expected participated in the first day of the exercise yesterday. The 
prospect of being exposed to the very dangers they fled to this country to 
escape might well outweigh the benefits of being properly registered.
While, as Finance Minister Colm Imbert indicated a few days ago, T&T isn't 
seeking funding for international agencies for the migrant registrations, that 
does not preclude other forms of support.
Indeed, guidance from UNHCR, Amnesty International and other agencies may help 
in properly navigating the humanitarian and other issues arising from the 
Venezuelan crisis.   