T&T must learn from the mistakes of others 

By mid-June, when the Venezuelan migrant registration process ends, there should 
be a clearer picture of how many of them are seeking asylum in Trinidad and 
Tobago from political and economic turmoil in that country.
In every other sense, however, this country is entering into uncarted territory. 
Fears that T&T could soon be bursting at the seams are well-founded given the
influx by the boatloads at numerous points along the country's porous coastal 
borders in just the last few weeks.
To understand the situation that confronts us, bear in mind that since 2014 more 
than two million Venezuelans have fled to Colombia, Peru, Ecuador and Brazil, as
well as T&T and other parts of the Caribbean, in what is easily the largest 
cross-border displacement of people in this region's history. All of these 
countries are now struggling to come up with the best formula for accomodating 
waves of migrants while absorbing the inevitable social and economic shock that
it brings. 
It might be useful for the authorities here to look at the experiences of 
countries in South America and try to learn from their mistakes. T&T has neither 
the land space nor the resources to endure the same level of strain as those 
much larger countries. 
Consider, for example, the humanitarian crisis now being experienced in Maicao, 
Colombia, located just a short drive away from Maracaibo in Venezuela. In a 
relatively short space of time, this once prosperous border city has degenerated
into a refugee town struggling to cope with a steadily increasing tide of 
migrants.
Colombian authorities tried to head off problems by allowing Venezuelans to come
and go freely within a designated border area. More than half a million of them 
were given the right to work and their children were allowed to register at 
primary schools. However, within just six months the population of Maicao 
quadrupled to an estimated 60,000. A refugee camp set up on the border by the 
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is bursting at the seams 
and Colombian authorities are struggling to accomodate new arrivals. 
The situation is even worse in another country bordering Venezuela, Brazil. 
There, the influx has been putting a strain on small border cities like 
Pacaraima, where many of the migrants are now living on the streets or in tents.
Needless to say, these conditions have been fuelling tensions between migrants
and local people.
This is another situation authorities here will have to keep a close watch for, 
as already there is an atmosphere of of fear and suspicion that could erupt into
violence if allowed to spiral out of control.
T&T cannot afford to repeat the mistakes of nearby countries. The shocks cannot 
be as easily absorbed here, so we have to strive to manage this crisis 
differently and better.