Another disaster warning sign

We live in a small country that is highly industrialised. In addition to energy
facilities, there are other chemical industries located in very limited 
geographic spaces and therefore, unavoidably, in close proximity to residential
areas.
Fortunately, T&T has never experienced a full-scale industrial disaster with 
multiple casualties and huge losses. However, there is room for complacency, as 
there is an ever-present danger of such an event, particularly in the country's 
oil belt in south Trinidad.
That is why there should be some concern about the two chemical waste fires that 
have occurred in just a matter of days in La Brea. While both fires were 
extinguished and there were no reports of casualties, the fact that bush fires 
developed into huge environmental blazes raises questions about safety and 
monitoring systems at industrial facilities. These incidents, as well as the 
fires a few weeks earlier that burned for several days in Point Fortin, should 
be getting the full attention of officials of the Office of Disaster 
Preparedness and Management (ODPM), the Environmental Management Authority, 
OSHA, as well as the Ministry of National Security.
Yesterday's early morning fire at the Kaizen Environmental Services compound in 
La Brea was close enough to residential communities to cause panic. Had the 
thick black smoke enveloped homes and public spaces, there would have been an 
added worry about the health and environmental effects from the noxious fumes.
However, the winds blew the smoke out over the Gulf of Paria where, for a few 
hours, it could be seen in satellite images.
It could have turned out much worse. Kaizen is a company involved in waste 
disposal and other services within the industrial, petrochemical and energy 
sectors. However, the company is equipped with state-of-the-art facilities used 
for various types of environmental detection, which may have helped with a rapid 
response.
Initial reports are that a nearby bush fire spread to the Kaizen compound and 
workers at the plant heard an explosion before flames erupted. However, 
investigations are ongoing and the complete sequence of how the fire spread will 
not be known for days, perhaps weeks.
The crucial questions that must be asked are about the capacity of the country's 
emergency services to respond quickly and effectively to more serious incidents. 
It is well known that the T&T Fire Service is currently limping along well below 
capacity, without enough fire tenders to properly service many parts of the 
country. To compound the situation, most fire officers do not have personal 
protective gear, which puts them at high risk in any natural or man-made 
disaster.
In addition, the ODPM's management of flooding disasters has been inadequate, to 
put it mildly. Yet there have been no indications of efforts at any level to 
ensure that T&T is disaster ready.
The La Brea fire should be a wake-up call. If the country isn't fully prepared, 
it urgently needs to get prepared.