Amnesty plan details needed now

Incidents in recent days suggest National Security Minister Stuart Young needs
to go public with full details of Government's plan to execute its one-year 
amnesty programme for Venezuelan nationals currently residing here legally and
illegally. 
This is because yesterday's detention and release of 105 Venezuelans in South 
Trinidad has caused panic both among Trinidadian nationals and Venezuelans here 
seeking a better life. By the Immigration Division's own admission, the 
Venezuelans detained yesterday were documented, given permission to stay until 
July and released because they had simply nowhere to keep them.
It is possible that these migrants would have made their way to Trinidad and 
Tobago in recent days as hundreds of Venezuelans continue to flee the 
socio-economic turmoil in their country before the start of May 31 to June 14
amnesty process here. 
In detailing the plan last month, Minister Young said registration would take
place in Port-of-Spain, San Fernando, Cedros, Arima and Scarborough between the 
hours of 7 and 5 pm and will be supervised by the Ministry.
Venezuelans housed at the Immigration Detention Centre will be allowed to 
register. Venezuelans must provide proof of their nationality, be fingerprinted,
photographed, undertake a medical examination, give their local address and 
contact numbers before they get registration cards which will allow them to work 
for a year. 
The ministry will conduct intelligence searches with Interpol and other 
Venezuelan agencies to ensure the information provided by applicants is accurate 
within the programme's first six months and deport those found to have serious 
criminal records and lied about this or who commit such acts while here under 
the programme.
But recent reports suggest Minister Young may have underestimated this 
undertaking. Even before yesterday, there were reports of scores of Venezuelans 
already here either forced into criminal activity or willingly committing these 
acts. Many others will continue to make their way here but there is no guarantee 
that all them will register in the programme over fear it may also be part of a 
ploy to eventually deport them thereafter.
So the question which arises now is how will T&T cater to the extra burden after 
the registration process? When Minister Young addressed the matter last month, 
he said registered Venezuelans will be entitled to free limited public health 
care, $15 minimum wage and would pay taxes on salaries exceeding $6,000. 
What he is yet to say, however, is whether Government will put a cap on the 
numbers of Venezuelans being registered, how they will be monitored once they 
are in the system and how Government will cater to the extra burden put on 
social services and other amenities, which by the end of yesterday will also 
have to factor in housing. 
Either way, with the registration period fast approaching, Minister Young must 
come forward now to explain how this programme, expected to cost an initial $5 
million, will be successfully implemented and of its repercussions for all 
citizens.