Caring for the desperate

One hundred and one Venezuelans were found at Santa Flora late last week. The 
group of women, men and children were found at a makeshift camp after arriving 
on different boats. The story the tired, hungry and quite illegal Venezuelans 
told Newsday is a remarkable narrative of their survival in the forests of Palo 
Seco, living off fish they caught and mangoes, getting by on supplies brought to 
them by other Venezuelans and getting bitten by bugs day and night.
All of them arrived from Tucupita, one of the closest points in Venezuela to the 
south Trinidad coastline. Kim Quashie, personal secretary to the chairman of the 
Siparia Regional Corporation, told of seeing a man choosing women to spend the 
night with him. “They are not grapes or apples,” Quashie thundered, “they are 
humans!”
It’s a point that’s getting a little lost amid concerns about cheap labour, 
spicy senoritas and Hispanic crime lords. It is the grim reality for many of 
these desperate migrants, braving treacherous waters that have killed their 
fellow citizens, landing in a strange country that doesn’t speak their language 
and risking being sent back to their homeland. So they board vessels that often 
aren’t built for the open sea crossing with the little suitcases and bags that 
are all they can carry, because it’s the only sensible choice that’s left.
Minister of National Security Stuart Young has announced that border security 
exercises are ongoing, but clearly they are not going well nor are they 
particularly effective. On Friday, Opposition MP Rodney Charles called for the 
resignation of Young, describing the Government’s performance in the matter as 
hallmarked by “cluelessness and ineptitude.”
Beyond the growing concerns about Venezuelan criminals infiltrating the country 
is the simple fact that Venezuelans here are positioning themselves to assist 
their countrymen in successfully making the journey from the mainland to the 
southwestern coast of Trinidad.
At Thursday's post-Cabinet briefing, the Prime Minister raised the spectre of a 
Trinidad and Tobago overrun by millions of fleeing Venezuelans. While such 
concerns will inevitably be a part of long-term planning to manage an issue of 
growing concern, the focus must remain on effective border control, not least to 
ensure the safety of desperate migrants.
Our desperate visitors, illegal or not, should meet a formal migrant policy that 
clearly articulates terms and conditions for their planned stay. The 
registration exercise due to begin this week is a step in the right direction to 
ensure this. There can be no question about the desperation of those Venezuelan 
citizens coming to our shores.
TT must ensure that the cordial relationship between our nations is reflected in 
a measured extension of our hospitality that serves both this country and those 
who have turned to it in their time of need.