Are we ready?

In a week's time, this country will begin of registration process Venezuelans 
who are seeking asylum here. The process is intended to formalise their stay
here and give them a sense of hope after fleeing their homeland where a deep 
sense of hopelessness now pervades.
The numbers of Venezuelan migrants flooding the shores of T&T have been growing
over the past six weeks since the announcement by National Security Minister
Stuart Young in April that there will be a two-week registration period from 
May 31 to June 14.
When he addressed a post-Cabinet media briefing yesterday, Prime Minister Dr 
Keith Rowley shed little light on preparations for the registration, deferring
questions on whether registration offices are ready and other related issues. He 
said those issues will be dealt with at another press conference.
There is considerable interest in how this unprecedented initiative in T&T will 
take shape and how far-reaching it will be since the migrants can now be found
throughout the country. 
While he was short on details, Dr Rowley was clear on one thing—that whatever is 
done he is determined to protect the interest of the people of T&T.
"We have to limit our exposure to the fallout from Venezuela," he said.
Even as he maintained that the doors of T&T remain open to Venezuelans, Dr 
Rowley was quick to point out that none of the international agencies seeking 
T&T's interest will want to turn this country into a refugee camp. Never mind 
that many pockets of the country already have the appearance of refugee camps.
In communities in south Trinidad, residents have opened their arms to 
Venezuelans assisting them as best as they can. The Living Water Community and 
the Roman Catholic Church have also been leading the way in assisting the 
migrants. Still, the problem looks like one that could easily overwhelm us.
Today, as head of the National Security Council, Dr Rowley will convene a 
meeting to discuss the Venezuelan influx. He has said that he is not "naive" and
is well aware that criminal elements are entering the country in the current
refugee influx, and that there might be a Venezuelan link in human trafficking.
Many nationals have no problem helping Venezuelans in their hour of need, but 
there are concerns about the criminal element, especially as T&T already has an
out of control crime problem.
In announcing the amnesty registration period last month, Minister Young 
promised that the authorities would work with Interpol to ensure that the 
criminal elements are deported.
The National Security Council, when it meets under the leadership of Prime 
Minister Rowley, needs to devise a clear plan to ensure that this country does 
not fall further prey to transnational criminals.
Local criminals are already testing the country's national security forces, so 
there is no capacity for the imported variety.  