Rio Claro Chairman must step aside

The country on Tuesday witnessed the spectacle of Chairman of the Mayaro/Rio 
Claro regional corporation Glen Ram refusing to step down from office in the 
face of bribery charges.
Ram, the elected councillor for Biche/Charuma, told members of the Council and 
his supporters at the Corporation's statutory meeting that he intended remaining 
Chairman until the end of his term expected towards the end of the year.
He said: "I am a strong one and I will fight the battle and I am making it public
here today in this statutory meeting of the Council that Glen Ram will wear this
chain until the end of his term."
More than that Ram insisted that he intended to seek the UNC's support to again 
contest the electoral district on behalf of the party. He said he filed his 
local government election nomination papers and was waiting to appear before the 
screening committee. 
"I have nothing to hide. The party knows of my work, my 20 years of dedication 
to this region. I will continue to fight for them and I will get the job done," 
he said. 
The Chairman of the Corporation is charged with accepting a bribe and corruptly
soliciting a $1,500 bribe from a contractor. He is on $100,000 bail. 
This paper makes no judgment on the innocence or guilt of Mr Ram and indeed he
must be given the presumption of innocence. However, with charges laid against 
him, Ram must do the right thing and step down as Chairman of the corporation.
This country has had many examples of politicians being accused of corruption 
and either choosing to do the right thing or being made to do so by their 
leaders.
Recently Gerald Ramdeen resigned as a UNC senator amid charges of corruption. 
Some years ago the current Energy Minister Franklin Khan resigned when he was 
accused of corruption in the Manning administration of 2002/2007. So too did 
Eric Williams after he and Khan were ironically accused by another councillor in 
the very Rio Claro/Mayaro Corporation of taking a bribe.
When people are elected to polical office it is done by the will of the majority
of the people who vote for that individual and the party they represent to best
serve their interest. The allegation of corruption, inclusive of bribery, is a 
significant one since it goes to the heart of trust between the people and their 
representatives. 
In light of Mr Ram's refusal to do the decent thing and step aside, it is now up
to the UNC and in particular its political leader Kamla Persad-Bissessar to act.
Silence on this matter, Mrs Persad-Bissessar is not acceptable. Indeed the time
has long gone for a mechanism to be found where as a country we develop a 
culture that will ensure the position adopted by Mr Ram is unacceptable at any 
level.  