Sex slavery a national disgrace 

Hidden in plain sight, in locations across this country from rural villages to 
upscale gated communities, horrific crimes are being committed against migrant
women and young girls. Lured to this country by promises of jobs and an 
improved quality of life, increasing numbers of these undocumented migrants are
being forced into prostitution.
Guardian Media Limited's investigative series: Vendidas—Sex Trafficking in Plain 
Sight, has in recent days exposed the extent to which criminals have been 
exploiting the political and economic crisis in neighbouring Venezuela.
However, these stories of exploitation and abuse revealed in the in-depth 
reports by journalists Hema Ramkissoon and Mark Bassant represent just the tip
of the iceberg of enslavement and forced prostitution that has been taking place
in this country for years.
Particularly disturbing is that sex slavery is taking place here because a 
network of criminal facilitators, including police officers, immigration 
officials and others, have been in cahoots with human traffickers to get women
and girls into this country.
Sex slavery is real and the fact that it is taking place in T&T is a national 
disgrace. We as a nation owe it to ourselves to expose these criminal human
trafficking and prostitution rings.
It is one of this country's worst kept secrets that there are venues across this
country, including hotels and bars, where these women—living, breathing human 
beings—are being traded as though they are mere commodities. 
Even worse, their victimisation continues even after the authorities crack down
on these places of ill repute. They are usually the ones to be arrested, 
convicted and deported, while the individuals who patronise these places and the
men and women responsible for their enslavement escape unscathed.
This calls for a national campaign. Citizens need to be reminded of their 
responsibility to say something and do something when they become aware of cases
of human trafficking and sexual exploitation.
In addition, Prime Minister Dr Keith Rowley, National Security Minister Stuart
Young and Police Commissioner Gary Griffith must address this scourge to bring 
it to a halt as a matter of urgency.
It has been known for some time that T&T is a destination, source and transit
country for women and children subjected to trafficking in persons. However, 
this country has been flagged by international agencies for not fully complying
with the minimum standards for the elimination human trafficking, although in 
recent years some efforts have been made to do so.
Greater efforts must be made to prosecute and punish human trafficking crimes
and to protect victims and in this regard, the efforts of the Counter 
Trafficking Unit (CTU) of the Ministry of National Security needs to be more 
fully reported.
We also appeal to citizens to have a sense of compassion and do what is right.
This modern day slavery must end.