CEPEP's puddle of murkiness

Lack of accountability, weak record-keeping, personality confrontations and a 
demonstrable challenge to transform the Community-Based Environmental Protection 
and Enhancement Programme (CEPEP) from a State-funded make-work programme 
steeped in political patronage are issues that evidently continue to dog CEPEP.
An agency of the Ministry of Rural Development and Local Government, the CEPEP 
Company’s website identifies a lofty agenda—“CEPEP… is one of the main pillars 
in the national strategy for development of the Green Economy of Trinidad and 
Tobago”—that is at odds with the petty, undisciplined behaviour on show at 
Monday’s parliamentary Joint Select Committee (JSC) on State Enterprises. 
Within minutes of the start of the JSC session, CEPEP chairman Ashton Ford, 
prompting expressions of disappointment from JSC members and its chairman, 
Independent Senator Anthony Vieira, gathered his papers and walked out of the 
meeting, leaving service of the public interest to his deputy and assembled 
members of management.
Disclosure of a $1 million golden handshake for a former chief executive officer 
whose term of office lasted just one year, and a confidentiality arrangement 
preventing disclosure of the terms of the CEO’s separation from the CEPEP 
Company, raise red flags for this newspaper, as it did to JSC members on Monday. 
Why was this done, on whose authority and why accountability for expenditure of 
public funds is avoided through a non-disclosure agreement are among the obvious 
questions arising. Line minister Kazim Hosein and Finance Minister Colm Imbert, 
currently acting Prime Minister, owe the public a fulsome explanation for this 
questionable use of public money, especially at a time when citizens are either 
losing jobs or not being paid salaries because of national revenue shortfalls.
Allegations of inflated contracts for works outside the scope of CEPEP’s 
original mandate, submission of unsigned minutes of board meetings, and the 
reported crash of software and consequent loss of critical company data add to 
the puddle of murkiness that surrounds operations of this company across 
political administrations. Fuelling these issues is the use of CEPEP, and its 
predecessor make-work programmes, as a common avenue for political patronage 
and vote-getting.
Investment in employment for those unskilled citizens unable to make a living 
otherwise is a laudable initiative when twinned with meaningful efforts at 
training and networking for participants so that they can graduate from the 
ten-days cycle and enter the world of sustainable, productive employment and 
citizenship. The targeted objectives and outcomes have fallen far short of this 
vision for CEPEP, touted by governments present and past. In this regard, a 
status report on recent announcements of CEPEP workers contributing to 
agricultural production, not covered by Monday’s JSC session, is due.
The parliamentary JSC, rather than its run-of-the-mill enquiry that generates a 
report for parliamentarians, may wish to drill deeper and consider an intense 
focus on CEPEP, reasons for the uunrealised philosophy eloquently expressed on 
its website, and the future of this programme that has achieved little other 
than putting small amounts of money in the pockets of unskilled workers.